---
layout: post
title:  "The danger of generational politics"
date:   2016-03-01
excerpt: "Osmond Chiu on the danger of generational politics."
tag:
- generational politics
- equality
- australia
- identity politics
- solidarity
- democracy
- housing

---


<p>Released yesterday,&nbsp;<a href="https://www.themonthly.com.au/issue/2016/march/1456750800/richard-cooke/boomer-supremacy">Richard Cooke’s essay</a>&nbsp;in <em>The Monthly</em>&nbsp;has really touched a nerve. Lots of friends have shared the essay&nbsp;on social media, saying how it captures how they feel about the dominance of the Baby Boomers.</p>
<p>For many young people, it is increasingly hard to find a secure, well paying job. Many rack up big debts to pay for their education but still can't find a permanent job. At the same time, housing is increasingly unaffordable with any hope of home ownership disappearing. At the same time,&nbsp;they feel patronised by an older generation who condescendingly say they just need to make sacrifices like they did. Yet&nbsp;it&nbsp;was a different age, an age of secure jobs, free education and more affordable housing, something almost&nbsp;inconceivable today.</p>
<p>This resentment at Boomers isn’t anything new, it has been bubbling away for awhile. While <a href="http://www.blackincbooks.com/books/generation-less">Generation Less</a> is being released next month, a decade ago <a href="http://www.smh.com.au/news/book-reviews/please-just-f-off-its-our-turn-now/2006/03/14/1142098435830.html">Please Just F* Off, It's Our Turn Now</a> was released. The young sticking it to older generations isn’t anything new, the Baby Boomers rebelled against their parents, but something&nbsp;makes the current situation different. There is a pervasive sense that young people today will be the first generation since the Great Depression that will be worse off than their parents.</p>
<p>What's more is that young people are increasingly angry and frustrated that they have been sold a lie. They&nbsp;have grown up in an individualised, consumer-driven world where it was about their choices. The idea that you&nbsp;can do anything you want to do, work hard and you'll be successful and the future would keep improving was uncontested. There was an emphasis was on social mobility and equality of opportunity, "growing the pie", not redistribution. Post-GFC, people are starting to realise that it is utter bollocks.</p>
<p>The strange thing is that it has taken the form of intergenerational rather than class conflict. Young people are railing against an unfair distribution of resources, privilege from the ownership of capital or having wealthy parents, a system rigged against them. And yet it does not manifest as a form of class consciousness, even one that is intersectional.&nbsp;A&nbsp;single female pensioner that does not own her own home is in a similar position to&nbsp;a young renter with insecure work&nbsp;except with fewer options.&nbsp;Essentially timing has meant that it is more likely to be the Boomers who have accumulated wealth and capital but it is mostly about class. But why is generational politics rather than the politics of class the dominant narrative?</p>
<p>I would argue that the erosion of traditional institutions and forms of identity, particularly class, has played a big role. Structural changes&nbsp;have meant&nbsp;the demise of traditional career paths, declining union density, decoupling of where you work and live have all played a part in the breakdown of traditional sense of class identity. With many&nbsp;people no longer living and working in the same community or staying in the occupation for long periods of time, the strength of class identity has eroded away.</p>
<p>At the same time, there has been the rise of identity politics. Age fits quite well within an identity politics framework. While not the same as other manifestations of identity politics, there is a sense of institutionalised disadvantage<span style="line-height:1.7;">&nbsp;and there are common experiences that unite a disparate group of people, creating a common identity that resonates with many people.</span></p>
<p>This growing intergenerational conflict is not unique to Australia. It is happening across the world.&nbsp;The big danger for progressives it that unless addressed properly it becomes a right-wing&nbsp;vehicle for dismantling the welfare state and pursuing anti-tax individualism, based on resentment.</p>
<p>Fundamental to the welfare state is&nbsp;the idea of intergenerational solidarity.&nbsp;Solidarity is about feelings of sympathy and responsibility for others. Welfare spending is essentially a compact of intergenerational solidarity.&nbsp;Younger workers pay taxes to support older workers’ pensions and healthcare costs but&nbsp;they benefit from previous generations'&nbsp;investments in infrastructure, innovation and environmental protection.&nbsp;The understanding is that everyone benefits from the support of others&nbsp;and that we are part of a larger community of shared interests.</p>
<p>Intergenerational conflict undermines that compact, particularly when fiscal pressures caused by an ageing population has meant a push to rein in support for the young, particularly as the old become a larger proportion of the population.&nbsp;Any sense of reciprocity is destroyed because while the older generations get or maintain support, the young&nbsp;lose theirs and thus do not have a stake in social supports. While older generations have a (rightful) sense that they should get support as they contributed financially, younger people ask, "Why am I subsidising the old when I don't get any support?" It is a recipe for a highly divided and stratified society.</p>
<p>Shifting the focus to class and rebuilding intergenerational solidarity won't be easy.&nbsp;It requires a cross-generational&nbsp;understanding there is a shared interest in tackling inequality and entrenched privilege but it needs to be done. If it isn't, the intergenerational conflict will only get worse and it will further breed resentful, toxic individualism.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
